what can be doubted((Rene Descartes, Meditations On First Philosophy)

1
It has been some years since I was for the first time struck by how many falsehoods I had taken for truths when I was very young, and by how doubtful and uncertain everything subsequently based on such questionable material had to be. In this way I came to see the need, once in my life, to demolish all that I had accepted up to that point, and to make a fresh start from the very foundations, if I wanted to achieve anything solid and lasting in the sciences. But the project looked truly enormous, so I waited until I was old and mature enough to be sure there could never be a better time for taking up the task. This led me to put the project off for so long that now I would at fault if, instead of taking it up, I spent what time remains to me in deliberations. So now that my mind is free of all cares, and I have arranged to be left in peaceful solitude, I will apply myself seriously and freely to the general demolition of my beliefs.

2
To achieve this end it will not be necessary for me to prove that all my beliefs are false, since it might not come to that. Rather, because reason now teaches me that I should be just as careful about without assent from uncertain, doubtful things as from patent falsehoods, the least bit of doubt on any point will suffice for complete rejection. And for this it will not be necessary to examine each article individually, which would be an endless task. Once the foundation of a building is undermined, everything above goes with it. So I will go straight for the basic principles underlying all my former beliefs.

3
Whatever I have up till now accepted as most true and assured I have gotten either from the senses or through the senses. But from time to time I have found that the senses deceive, and it is prudent never to trust completely those who have deceived us even once.

4
Yet although the senses sometimes deceive us with respect to barely perceivable and distant objects, one finds that concerning many other matters no reasonable doubt is possible, even though these things are known through the senses: for example, that I am here, sitting by the fire, wearing a dressing-gown, holding this piece of paper in my hand, and other things of a similar nature. And how could it be denied that these are my hands, or that this is my body? Unless, perhaps, I were to compare myself to madmen, whose brains are so disordered and clouded by chronic vapors of bile that they staunchly maintain they are kings when they are paupers; that they are dressed in purple and gold when they are naked; or that they have jugs for heads, or bodies made of glass. But these are the insane, and I would think myself just as far gone if I took them as my model, and conducted my life accordingly.

5
What a brilliant argument! As if I were not a man in the habit of sleeping at night and, while asleep, having the same sorts of experiences madmen do while awake – indeed, sometimes even less probable ones. And how often, asleep at night, have I become convinced of quite ordinary things - that I am here in my dressing-gown, seated by the fire - when in fact I am lying undressed in bed! Yet at the moment I surely see this paper with open eyes; I shake my head and it is not asleep; I deliberately and intentionally stretch out my hand and feel what I feel. None of this would happen with such distinctness to one asleep. As if I did not remember all the times I have been tricked by exactly similar thoughts while asleep! The more carefully I reflect on all this, the more clearly I see that there are never any sure signs by means of which one can distinguish wakefulness from sleep. As a result, I begin to feel stupified, and this feeling only reinforces the notion that I may be asleep.

6
Therefore, let us now suppose we dream: that these things - that my eyes are open, that I shake my head and stretch out my hands - are not true. Perhaps, indeed, I do not even have such things as hands or a body at all. On the other hand, at least this much has to be admitted: the visions which come in sleep are like paintings, insofar as they are things that can only be fashioned in the likeness of real things. Therefore at least these general kinds of things - eyes, head, hands and bodies as such - are not figments of imagination but are real and exist. For even when painters try to invent satyrs and sirens with the most peculiar shapes, they cannot give them natures which are new in every way; they simply mix and match the limbs of different animals. Or if somehow they manage to make up something so new that nothing remotely similar has ever been seen before - something that is, therefore, completely fictitious and unreal - at least the colors used to make it up must be real. By similar reasoning, although these general kinds of things - eyes, head, hands, so forth - could be imaginary, this much must be granted: that certain other still simpler and more universal things are real. These are, as it were, the true colors from which we form all our mental images of things, whether true or false.

7
This class appears to include corporeal nature in general, and its extension; the shape of extended things; the quantity, or size and number of these things; the place in which they may exist, the time through which they may endure, and so on.

8
Therefore, a reasonable conclusion to draw from this might be that physics, astronomy, medicine, and all other disciplines which depend on the study of composite things, are doubtful; whereas arithmetic, geometry, and other subjects of this kind, which deal only with the simplest and most general things, regardless of whether they really exist in nature or not, contain something certain and indubitable. For whether I am awake or asleep, two plus three are five, and a square has no more than four sides. It seems impossible that such transparent truths could ever be suspected of falsehood.

9
And yet I have a deep-rooted, long-standing notion in my mind that there is an omnipotent God who made me the kind of creature that I am. How do I know he has not brought it about that there is no earth, no sky, no extended thing, no shape, no size, no place, while at the same time ensuring all these things appear to me to exist just as they appear now? What is more, since I sometimes think others go wrong in matters concerning which they think they possess the most perfect knowledge, may I not similarly go wrong every time I add two and three, or count the sides of a square, or in some even simpler matter, if that is imaginable? But perhaps God would not have permitted me to be deceived in this way, since he is said to be ‘most supremely good’. On the other hand, if it were inconsistent with his goodness to have created me in such a way that I am constantly deceived, it would seem equally alien to his goodness to allow me to be deceived on occasion – a proposition that cannot possibly be maintained.

10
Perhaps there may be those who would prefer to deny the existence of so powerful a God, if the alternative were to believe everything else is uncertain. Let us not argue with them, but grant instead that everything said about God is a fiction. According to their hypothesis, then, I have arrived at my present state by fate or chance or an unbroken chain of events, or by some other means. Yet since deception and error seem to be imperfections, the less powerful they make my original cause, the more likely it is that I am so imperfect as to be deceived all the time. I have no answer to these arguments, but am finally compelled to admit that there is not one of my former beliefs concerning which a doubt may not legitimately be raised; and this is not an idle or ill-considered conclusion, but one based on powerful and well thought-out reasons. So in future I must withhold assent from these former beliefs just as carefully as I would from obvious falsehoods, if I want to arrive at anything certain.

11
But it is not enough simply to have noticed this. I must make an effort to keep these things in mind. Habitual patterns of thought keep reasserting themselves, and, against my wishes, take command of my faculty of belief, which is, as it were, bound in their service as a result of long occupation and the law of custom. I shall never break the habit of confidently assenting to these opinions, so long as I suppose them to be what in fact they are: namely, highly probable propositions which – despite being in a sense doubtful, as has been shown – are more reasonably believed than denied.
In light of this, I think I would be well advised to direct my will in quite the opposite direction – to deceive myself by pretending for a time that these former opinions are utterly false and delusory. I shall do this until the weight of prejudice is equal on both sides, and mere habit no longer drags down my judgement, holding it back from correct perception. In the meantime, I know that no danger or error can result from my plan, and that I cannot possibly go too far in my distrustful attitude. This is because the project I undertake does not involve action, merely the acquisition of knowledge.

12
I will suppose, therefore, not that God deceives me – he being supremely good, and the fount of truth; rather, there is an evil genius, enjoying utmost power and cunning and employing them to this end. I shall think that the sky, the air, the earth, colors, shapes, sounds and all external things are merely delusions in dreams – things he has devised to ensnare my judgement. I shall consider myself not as having hand or eyes, flesh or blood or senses, but as falsely believing that I have all these things. I shall stubbornly and solidly persist in this meditation; so that even if it is not in my power to know any truth, I shall at least do what I can – namely, to guard resolutely against assenting to any falsehoods. In this way, the deceiver – however powerful and cunning he may be – will be unable to impose on me in the slightest degree. But this is an arduous task, and a kind of laziness drags me back to normal life. I am like a prisoner who is enjoying an imaginary freedom while asleep; as he begins to suspect he is asleep, he dreads waking up, and carries on with the pleasant illusion as long as he can. In just this way, I slide contentedly into my old opinions and dread being shaken out of them for fear that my peaceful sleep may be followed by hard, waking labor, and that I shall have to toil not in the light, but in the inescapable shadows of the difficulties I have now raised.
